truth when it comes to healing
is really really open.
Make wisdom go viral. That's J. Shetty's
self-proclaimed mission. The YouTuber
and podcaster is a giant in the world of
wellness and mental health influencers.
>> Thank you so much for allowing us into
your space.
>> Most favorite interview ever,
>> Kendall. Jenna Kendall, thank you.
>> He's had huge names on his show on
purpose. Part of Shedy's success has to
do with his message, a breezy [music]
blend of pop psychology and self-help
tips.
>> When things are bad, we think they'll be
bad forever, and we're wrong.
>> Overlaid with a reassuring patina of
Eastern spirituality. While there's no
doubt about Shett's [music] success, I
had other doubts of my own. A 2024
article in the Guardian raised questions
about many aspects of Shed's public
life, including accusations of
plagiarism on his platforms early in his
career and even the extent of his
training as a monk. That's reporting
that Shetty and his lawyers have
disputed and which we talked about at
length in our conversation. So, how did
a man who espouses monklike thinking
[music] come to live a glamorous life in
LA? It's a seeming contradiction that
he's apparently been thinking about,
too. [music] Here's my conversation with
J. Shetty.
>> [music]
>> Hey, David.
>> Hi, Jay. How are you?
>> I'm doing really well. I'm doing really
well. Uh, yeah. Sorry. How was your
weekend?
>> It was good. It was mellow. Melo. Just
stuff with the kids. How about you?
>> Oh, amazing. Uh, it was Grammys week, so
very busy, but fun and uh enjoyable. So,
it was good.
>> Um, you know, it's funny. I was I've
been watching so much of your stuff for
honestly the last six weeks or something
like that. Really trying to immerse
myself. And just yesterday, I watched a
video of yours that had a segment about
how to have difficult conversations. I
thought the the uh most useful part of
it was that you talked about um the
being clear about one's own intentions
during a conversation and and I think
that's a very useful thing and I I uh
feel like my intention with you and with
everyone is to just understand as much
as I can.
>> I love that. Well, thank you for sharing
that with me. And my intention today is
always to try and share myself uh as
authentically as I can.
>> Um, good. Because I I hope I have some
hard questions for you. Uh, so
[laughter] we'll see we'll see how that
goes. But um you know for for people who
aren't familiar with you and your work,
which of your beliefs would you say are
most fundamental to what you do as a as
a sort of wellness, self-help
influencer? What What are you
fundamentally trying to teach people
about?
>> I wouldn't even say I'm trying to teach.
The four things I really am encouraging
people to reflect upon are the four most
important questions I believe that we
all have to answer in life. The first is
how do I feel about myself? It's a
decision we make every day when we wake
up and we look in the mirror. The second
is uh what do I do for work? You know,
what do I do with my time? The third is
who do I choose to love and receive love
from? And the fourth is how do I choose
to serve the world? And so all of my
work is dedicated and devoted to helping
people reflect on and answer these
questions for themselves. So whether
someone come comes and asks me like,
"Hey Jay, like I really want to find my
purpose or I'm kind of stuck in my job
right now or maybe they're going through
a breakup and they're looking for
insight on what will help them heal or
someone who says, Jay, you know, your
work really, you know, your work helped
me through a divorce or your work
stopped me from committing suicide."
Like I think those are the kind of
things people usually come to me with
and so that's what I find is usually the
kind of questions and reflections and
insights that people are looking for
from me and I'm always trying to help
them think through those challenges. And
how how uh much do you find the um sort
of the answers to those questions change
depending on the individual
circumstances. Is it the case that you
know broadly speaking the same kinds of
answers apply
in most circumstances or it's more the
case that you know depending on the
specific circumstances the answers to
say you know how how can I find more
purpose or how can I feel better about
myself uh change.
There's two types of wisdom in my
opinion. There's timeless wisdom,
universal principles and language that
affects all of our hearts and that we
all resonate with. And then at the same
time, there's very specific timely
advice that we all need in a really
difficult moment. And so really, it
depends on how personally I'm in that
space with someone. If someone's at an
event of mine and they put up their hand
and they're on the microphone, they ask
a question, then I get to look in that
person's eyes. I get to see their body
language. I can ask them a follow-up
question. If I'm creating something like
a podcast episode, then that's naturally
more broad because it's me speaking from
one to many. And so to me, it's about
being adaptable and being personal and
being specific. And so my approach is to
always try and meet the person if I
really can get to know them and actually
be present with them. So you kind of the
to my mind big uh differentiator for you
or distinguishing factor is the fact
that you you trained as a monk. Uh you
know your your book of course was called
think like a monk um and specifically uh
you correct me if I'm wrong but you
trained within the Iskan movement uh
which is sort of colloquially known as
the Hari Krishna. Is that right?
>> [snorts]
>> So I trained uh as part of the Rad
Gopinath and Bak Bakhan Mana ashams uh
across India and the UK and Europe and
uh they are uh parts of that. Yes. And
um you know because of that training
there is this sense of uh ancient or
spiritual wisdom around your content.
And it's interesting because when I read
your books or or listen to your stuff,
[snorts] you know, a a lot of it sort of
reminds me of um sort of almost
cognitive cognitive behavioral therapy
material or or self-help material that
I've encountered in lots of different
places. um you know like list making um
sort of gratitude uh journaling um you
know you talk about the importance
simple importance of of breathing but
it's within this um sort of uh framework
of spiritual thinking and can you tell
me a little bit more about the interplay
between sort of your spiritual training
and uh sort of more secular self-help
ideas that also comes up in your work.
>> Absolutely. Yeah. I've always been
passionate and fascinated by the
intersection between ancient wisdom and
modern science. And when I first read
the Bhagat Gita, which is the primary
text that I reference in my books, uh,
which is a 5,000-y old text, and Eastern
wisdom, to me, pretty much every modern
growth idea or personal development idea
can be somehow traced back to it and
found in it. And so I find it to be an
incredible um map and conversation
starter for so much of the spiritual
wisdom that I love to share. So you know
recently we've been talking about the
value of circadian rhythms and the need
to see sunlight early in the morning.
And to me there's something known as sun
salutations in the eastern tradition of
yoga where that's exactly what you would
do. Now they didn't talk about it as a
circadian rhythm starter but that's
exactly how you'd start your morning. So
I've always found it fascinating to find
this intersection because I'm personally
deeply interested. I also find that it's
really beautiful when there are really
practical ways of showing how these old
ideas have a lot of validity today.
There's not many new things but there
are deeper ways of understanding the
same thing. You know, we hear about
things like uh um you know, mindfulness
has kind of uh exploded over the last
decade or so or um you know, people will
talk about uh karma or or um sort of uh
living within one's dharma, which I
think um dharma can basically be
understood as uh one's life purpose. Um
and you know people talk about these uh
concepts that are rooted in really um
religious and spiritual practices. And
sometimes I I wonder if
people maybe mistakenly think that they
can decouple the spiritual practices or
like the the true religious root of
these things um and just sort of use
them in kind of like a almost like a
fast food kind of way. Like it's a it's
a a a shortcut.
>> I have a different perspective that I'd
like to share. Yeah. Uh my my
perspective is that sometimes someone's
starting point in a deep practice may be
really simple, easy and potentially even
surface level. And that may be them just
dipping their toe in the water. And
that's how we all started something.
Like I'll give you an example during the
pandemic. I uh I [snorts] did uh I think
around 40 days of meditation on live on
Instagram, Facebook live and YouTube
live and people could just join from
their home and the amount of people that
I still meet today who will come up to
me and say JJ I started meditating
because of you now all these people had
never meditated in their entire life is
meditating on Instagram live the deepest
most profound meditation probably not
but if that's their starting point if
that's the connection point then what a
beautiful thing that people have gone on
to like travel and maybe go on a
meditation retreat and maybe do more
with their own life with whichever
teachers or practices that they love. I
think to me it's it's almost like it's
it's a good thing. I I'm very interested
in um people's turning points in their
lives. Um so I'd like to ask you about
what I think was your big turning point.
Uh which is, you know, you were a young
man in London. Um I believe you were
going to business school at the time or
>> I I I attended Cass Business School
which is now known as BA business
school. Yes.
>> And and um you ended up kind of on a
whim going to a lecture by a monk whose
name was was it Garangadas?
>> Garangadas. Yes.
>> And you you sort of had this uh uh you
were swept away had this uh epiphany
that you know he was saying something
that that you needed to hear. Can can
you um just tell me about what you heard
in that moment that was so powerful to
you that you thought well that that it
actually became kind of a life-changing
moment
really uh David it was probably even
beyond what I heard it was seeing a man
who externally was not attractive to me
in any way you know as a uh you know
seeing a man in robes with his head
shaved uh with an Indian accent from
India And I didn't understand even in
that moment probably of why I was so
attracted to him. But it was his sense
of peace, his sense of ease, his sense
of confidence in being so different. And
I think at that age in your life, you
know, you're always trying to fit in.
And and here was someone who didn't fit
in at all, but felt the like the most
comfortable person in the room. And to
me, that was more important, I think,
than anything he even said. you know, I
want to ask you something related to
that, which is um you know, it's to do
with kind of your uh arc and you know, I
think one of the one of the things
that's uh sort of particularly unusual
about your arc um is that it it's it
kind of looks from the outside like it's
an inversion of of uh
like a typical uh monk's journey where I
think, you know, usually uh or sort of
the typical version of that is somebody
uh you know decides to embrace monastic
life and then uh you know uh embraces a
kind of aestheticism or a renunciation
of you know [snorts] material things,
wealth, whatever it may be. Um,
in some ways it seems like you've like
you decided to pursue a monastic life uh
a and then have
uh moved towards um you know you're I
think you're probably doing pretty well
for yourself financially. You know
you're you hang out with uh glamorous
people. Um you know you're a successful
entrepreneur. Um are there any ways in
which you feel like this the spiritual
tradition in which you were training is
in tension with sort of the the life
that you're living now? First of all,
I'm not Yeah, I I'd say that there's a
understanding in uh spiritual tradition
which is all about how as humans we tend
to idolize or demonize things and that
the ultimate truth is to be able to
utilize everything for a higher purpose
and I think that's what's often missed
and so there's a beautiful statement in
the Gita which I was talking about
earlier the Bhagat Gita that says
Attachment and aversion are two sides of
the same coin.
And so I think we often in our western
understanding see detachment
as better than attachment. However, our
the spiritual understanding is far more
subtle and far more refined. That
detachment doesn't mean aversion.
Detachment means you can be close to
anything in the world and use it for a
higher purpose. Now I'm not saying I'm
doing that. I'm not saying I live in
that. I'm saying I try my best and I'd
say that's my aspiration. My aspiration
is that every day I'm living in the re
quote unquote real world or you know,
however we call it, uh I'm reminded of
my flaws. I'm reminded of my uh how far
away I am from uh truly living up to the
spiritual pursuits that I have and have
had for most of my life now. And I love
that. I love being reminded of how far I
have to go. And so I would argue that I
feel more close to growth in my current
life than I ever did uh in the ashram
because in the ashram I could almost
forget or think maybe I'd already found
it.
>> Is there any part of you that uh thinks
maybe that's an elaborate
self-justification?
>> Uh I have questioned that many times and
I continue to question it. Uh I think
that the spiritual philosophy of 5,000
years old is pretty clear on it. So I I
take that as my authority over myself.
However, the other side of it uh to be
quite frank and honest is I think it's
also a graduation. It's like I'm uh I'm
I'm married. I have businesses. We have
teams. We have companies. I'm not a monk
anymore. And I think it's uh it's almost
like it's almost like having to
recognize that you've evolved, you've
grown, you've your your life has
changed, and yeah, I'm not living that
way anymore. It's partly why I wrote a
book called Think Like a Monk, not Live
Like a Monk. Uh that was that was
intentional because I I think everyone
can think like a monk. I don't think
everyone, including me, uh can live like
a monk for the rest of their life.
>> Yeah. I think you know the the think
like a monk live like a monk distinction
is um sort of related to what I was
asking about uh earlier which is the uh
how how usefully we can decouple um sort
of religious belief from sort of
religiously inspired uh action and um
and I I know I keep asking you to to
like I keep asking like where is the
line here but I'm interested in trying
to understand where these boundaries are
but Is like is is there a point at which
um like
thinking like a monk
>> if you're not also living like a monk
stops being monklike thinking. Do you
know what I'm saying?
>> This is like a maybe that was my version
like a zen riddle. But
>> it's a
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah, it's a co. Yeah, zen con. Uh no,
David, I I I really appreciate you. I I
can tell that you're really trying to
understand it and so I want to try and
try and meet you there and and and help
you with that.
>> Yeah,
>> it's it's it's probably different across
traditions and everyone everyone has
their own version. It's Wait, let me let
me let me really sit with your question
cuz
>> how much can you think like a monk if
you're not really trying to live like a
monk? That's what the question is.
[snorts]
And my and my response to that with
sitting that and thank you for repeating
it is
what if thinking like a monk was the
beginning of that journey and living
like a monk could end up being a
potential pathway for the person who
tries to do that. Like I'll give it if
if every if every person in the world
started to think like a monk, things
would just improve in general, right? So
So I don't I'm not I don't want to force
everyone to try to live like a monk
because that's not going to happen
tomorrow or ever. I don't think that's
ever been the goal. But it's how can we
take these mental practices and how can
we apply them to our everyday lives to
actually improve our sense of peace and
purpose. I think I think that's the
goal.
>> Um I I'd like to ask a little bit more
about your specific content. Now when I
uh
watch your your material and mostly
mostly I I watch it uh um you know there
are some [snorts] guests like for
example uh an Adam Grant you know who
who is as uh you know he's a uh I
believe he teaches maybe at the Wharton
school or something like that highly uh
credentialed uh psychologist um and then
you you also have on folks like, you
know, John Edward, the uh, you know, the
psychic medium, uh, who's, you know,
let's just say his his credentials are
maybe more up in the air. Um, do you do
you think about sort of what
responsibility
you have as far as the sort of uh,
credibility of a given guest?
>> Yeah, absolutely. Our team does a lot of
research. uh team uh works very hard on
figuring out who we think would be uh
great to introduce our audience. We
think it's a responsibility that we take
very seriously. At the same time, we're
also listening to our audience as to who
they'd like to learn from, who they'd
like to listen from, what kind of things
they're struggling with and challenged
by. And a lot of guests are guests that
the audience wants to hear from that
they're asking for in the comment
section or writing to us on our website.
And so I think to me my job is to be
curious uh and it's to be curious for my
audience and community and it's also to
allow them to be involved in finding
people that they believed are important
for their healing, important for their
growth and important for their wellness
journey as well.
>> Does skepticism fit into what you do at
all?
>> Yeah, absolutely. I I I think that it's
uh you know, for example, like I I
recently interviewed um an
astrologologist. What is astrology and
how does it work?
>> So, astrology is the study of how the
sky mirrors what happens on Earth.
>> That's something that I had a lot of
questions about because it's not
something that, you know, I'm I've never
really read a horoscope out of a
magazine or, you know, and and felt that
it was, you know, valuable or valid
necessarily. And so there's definitely
my own personal interpretation that
comes into it, but it's still coming
from a place of wanting wanting to learn
and wanting to see where it goes. And it
doesn't mean I always walk out of a walk
out of anything a believer um or or a
you know a supporter in that sense. But
I am fascinated. I'm fascinated for my
audience. I think avoiding topics or
putting them aside doesn't doesn't gain
any value either.
>> But how do we figure out what's true?
Like isn't there also some value in
trying to deter determine whether or not
>> absolutely
>> you know uh astrology or or
psychic mediumship is is actually
>> true and and not just a pseudocience
like truth truth is why we're here to
figure to figure out what is what is
what is true or not.
>> Totally. And and I don't disagree with
you at all. I I think you're absolutely
right. I just think that truth when it
comes to healing
is really really open. It's it's it's
not like
healing doesn't look the same for
everyone and what helps some people
won't help other people. And that's also
true. And so it depends what your
definition of truth is. And I think
sometimes when we talk about truth,
which is important and and of course the
most valuable conversation, not every
it's like me saying to you like um
David, how how long have you been with
your partner?
>> Uh 17 years, something like that. 20
years.
>> Okay. Amazing. Amazing. Which is
incredible.
>> She'll be mad I didn't get that exactly
correct. [laughter]
>> I'm sorry. Somewhere between seven and
17.
>> Sorry to sorry to expose you like this.
I apologize. Uh congratulations. That
honestly that that's amazing. It's my
wife and I's, it's our 10th wedding
anniversary this year. Congratulations.
>> And 13 years together. So,
>> um, but, uh, it's like, how do I prove
that my love for my wife is true?
>> Like, what what what proves that? And,
and it's and it's not I'm not saying
that there isn't a way of answering that
question, but it's a very hard question
to answer as fact or fiction. Um,
because everyone will say something
different. Or if I asked your wife and
you asked my wife, what proves to you
that David loves you? or Jay, what
proves to you that you know your partner
loves you? Like they they'd probably
give very different answers, I imagine.
>> Yeah, I think I think you're mixing some
things together that maybe shouldn't be
mixed together. I mean, the answer to uh
what uh would what is proof of my love
for my wife? I think the proof would be
my actions every day. But the truth of
that proof is a very different kind of
truth than you know uh is my is my
broken bone healed or can the can the
stars tell me
>> what's going on in my life or can we
communicate with the dead. The these are
all different kinds of of truth that
require different levels of proof
>> for sure. But the proof is not I I don't
disagree with you at all. I I mean I the
questions that you're specifically
looking at I'm I've been uh both um
curious and skeptical in in those
interviews. I guess what I'm debating
with you and enjoying the discussion
that we're having is I I think it's
really hard to call someone else's
personal experience of healing with
something as not true. Um, and and that
is something that I'm not willing to put
aside because that's an important thing
that that humans also need to be curious
and skeptical about is is allowing space
for that. I think it's easier to be
like, "Yeah, true. We, you know, the
facts are all that matters."
>> Yeah. So, you know, I'm sure you know
there was this Guardian article that
came out in 2024 um where the writer,
you know, he sort of wrote about ways in
which uh you know, he said you, you
know, you sort of um you know, fudge
details, specific details about what
your actual training was as a monk, how
much time you actually spent in India
and sort of the timeline of of how all
that happened. But my my question about
that is whether you felt like you did
have to try and you know simplify or
elied details about your backstory
so as to make your story more legible to
to more people. like if there was a
story about J. Shetty that you wanted to
tell publicly, did you feel like you had
to um tell that story a certain way,
even if maybe that way was not 100%
factually accurate?
>> I've I've always been open and honest
about, you know, that time in my life
and clear about it. I mean, I lived as a
monk for three years. I traveled across
India, the UK, and Europe. And I think
what's fascinating to me is the value I
gained from that time is the teachings
and the lessons I share. And that's what
I'm really about and that's what I'm
really trying to deliver to the world.
Um
Jay, I feel like we can go deeper with
that answer. Uh were there things that
you felt like you had to simplify or or
um just tell in in a more fashion?
>> No, not at all. I I uh extremely clear
about and open about my experience. It
was uh 3 years it was traveling. I was
learning deep meditation in India and
study and then traveling to London to
share and teach. Standing to traveling
to Europe to share and teach that was
part of our practice and I think I've
created my created so much content and
there's uh insights to this you know
whether it's my books my podcasts
everywhere. And it it would be hard for
anyone to consume all of that to really
get the full picture. And so I think
that's that's really I think if someone
was reading and listening and following
me on Instagram and social media and
everything they'd they'd be able to very
clearly see it as well and they do. And
the other uh thing I wanted to ask about
from that guardian piece was you know
you there has been criticism uh of you
in the past for uh earlier in your
career sort of um sharing uh words of
wisdom without attribution or uh um you
know I think the your online uh coaching
school there were questions about
whether sort of uh aspects of its
accreditation
uh were were misleading in various ways.
And as far as I can tell, that stuff has
all been cleaned up. But I guess my
question to you is sort of what uh uh
what might account for those missteps?
Was there any intention to mislead in
some way?
>> I think if you look at my videos from
day one, you'll see me uh quoting,
sourcing, crediting appropriately all
the time. And I value the work of so
many other people that I share and
wisdom from others that I've gained from
and want to pass it on. And we actually
have a team now that's fully dedicated
to crediting and sourcing and
researching to make sure that all of
those things are kept intact. And I'm
I'm really proud of that because it's
such an important thing for us to be
doing to make sure that people who
deserve the credit uh receive it.
>> But that was an issue earlier, right? Is
like the what you're describing as a
change in practices.
I think that at the time there's so much
wisdom out there. There's so many things
being shared. It was never intentional.
Uh it was never my values are to be
clear and transparent and uh simply
share wisdom that I've gained and
learned and that's where if there were
any discrepancies, they were definitely
cleared up.
>> Um are there things that you feel like
you've learned from criticism of you
that you've encountered over the years?
Yeah, I've learned that uh
intention is important and um I've
learned that there's
such a
profound need to see anything that comes
your way as a mirror to see how you can
improve in every way. And so I think
that whether it's feedback, whether it's
criticism,
uh I look at it from the perspective of
how can I be better, how can I improve,
how can we be better, what can we do
differently. Uh and and I'm always
willing to, you know, take that
responsibility to do that because I
think that's what my teachers would want
me to do. That's what my training was,
you know, geared towards me to do. And
so anything that comes my way is is
always a way of improving, a way of
being better next time. I mean, I'm so
excited about uh the production company
we're building. I'm excited about all
the exciting work that we're up to
because I almost can't believe that I
get the opportunity to do this. It's um
it's I feel very grateful for it. I feel
very fortunate, very lucky.
>> Um
I was talking to someone about the uh
production company that uh you're is it
is say you la you're launching it or
what how would you describe what's in
>> we're announcing it with you? We're
announcing with you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So yeah, I haven't even I haven't even
talked about it yet. Yeah. This the
first time. But uh um I was talking with
someone about uh Perfect Strangers and
she said to me that uh one of the things
you're interested in doing is being um
like a destination for a certain type of
celebrity interview. Um is that
accurate?
>> I'm not not sure. No, no. I I would say
I would say on purpose already is that I
mean I would I would say that my podcast
has already been established as a place
when we find uh people of whether
they're athletes, musicians, actors,
artists, experts, thought leaders who
really want to open their heart and have
a space to really talk about things that
they've never talked about before and
behind the scenes whether it was Madonna
last year talking about her spiritual
journey or Emma Watson talking about the
uh you know the behind the scenes of an
incredible career. Uh I feel on purpose
is that destination and I'm really
grateful and proud that we've been able
to create it because I want to tell
stories that make people feel less
alone. David, did you see uh did you see
adolescence?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I don't know. I I was I was
extremely moved by that and I feel like
that's like a gold standard of things
that I'd love to be able to create and
put out there. stories that help parents
have better conversations with their
children, help uh partners have more
efficient conversations with each other,
create content that sparks conversation,
allows people to have deeper
conversations about mental health
awareness and what it looks like. Uh to
to really raise awareness of these
things in a way that isn't on the nose,
that isn't maybe teachy in a traditional
sense, but allows people to really
brought into the heart of what's going
on and what's happening at the root. And
so I think that I'm glad that you've
seen it because I think that's a really
good example of something that I would
aspire to want to make.
>> Um, you know, you you uh talk about the
subject of detachment in your work. Um,
do you think you've practiced detachment
in this interview?
>> Have I practiced detachment in this
interview?
Um,
what's your definition of detachment in
that question? I think in some of my uh
questions around sort of criticisms or
controversies, um you gave answers that
felt um
uh
safe and maybe a little more
comfortable. uh rather than detaching
from what safe what was safe or
comfortable and and answering in sort of
a a somewhat more uh objective or or
clear way. That's why I ask [snorts]
>> and I would I would uh say that to me my
definition of detachment is am I able to
be present here and be open and honest
with you and clear with you and uh I've
tried to do that to the best of my
ability.
>> I appreciate you speaking with me and I
am very much looking forward to talking
with you again and I think it's just a
couple days.
>> Yeah, absolutely. I look forward to as
well. Thank you so much.
On the interview, we talk to our guest
twice. [music]
This time, Jay Shetty and I go deeper
into the seeming conflict between his
monklike principles and being an [music]
influencer.
Jay, I'm I'm very happy to be speaking
with you again.
>> Me, too, David. It's good to see you.
>> Uh, do you have any thoughts from our
first conversation? Anything lingering?
>> That's a great question. Uh I think
there was you know something that that
maybe I didn't get a chance to share
with you and it was around this idea of
just we talked a bit about you know any
sort of criticism coming your way and I
think when I think about that it's you
know to let you in on that. It's like
it's like for me that's uncomfortable.
It's hard because you're trying to do
something with the best of intentions
and I think we all want to feel
understood and we want to feel seen. And
I think when you're misunderstood or not
seen in the way that you would like,
it's it's hard for everyone. And it's
been very hard for me and difficult for
me. And I think when you're being
judged, the first point is not to uh
push that person away. It's to see
whether that exists in you. And I think
when you actually look at yourself in
that way, you can find everything exists
in you. You can find, you know, and and
that's really vulnerable to say. It's
really open to say that you you can find
that every intention, every desire,
every uh you know, every intention
exists within you. Uh if you really take
a look in the mirror and if you're not
scared of looking at that. And so when I
look at my experience of all of that,
I've kind of come to this conclusion of
well, I do want to be deeply spiritual
and I want to be really successful. like
I I do want to be uh deeply connected to
my monk principles and I want to do
really well as an entrepreneur and it
almost feels like to me the balancing of
that or the aligning of that very
honestly and candidly speaking is worth
pursuing rather than this fixation we
have specifically in the west of being
like well I'm not going to I'm just
going to be this and this is how I
define myself to the world and myself
um that answer is opened up so many
questions for me. Um, and you know, I
think I uh I definitely have judged you
in a certain way. And it's related to
the, you know, sort of trying to
reconcile the monkish principles with
the sort of entrepreneur uh influencer
principles. And I think it's it's really
a a
it it's a skepticism that comes from a
particular type of perception of you.
And I think that when I think of you as
someone trying to operate within sort of
a a spiritual or a mental health realm,
then my skepticism kind of grows. If I
think about you as someone operating
within an entrepreneur or a sort of
influencer realm, then
I feel like you're sort of who you are
is much easier for me to understand. But
that's that's my those are my own
hang-ups. I want to know what I want to
know how you think you should be
perceived. Like what is the correct lens
through which to understand J Shetty?
>> David, I want to be honest about that.
Going back to my earlier point that I
was saying is I don't I don't fault you
for that skepticism and that thought
process because I've felt the same
internally.
Right? So like to to be honest with you,
it's like I don't the reason why that's
even interesting to hear for me is
because I've had that conversation with
myself. my
the um the paradox or the paradoxical
nature of my journey is something I've
had to live through and I've had to
reconcile mentally, emotionally,
spiritually, practically like it's
something I'm wrestling with on a daily
basis. And so when you say how I want to
be seen,
>> yeah,
>> it's it's not even an easy answer
because I'd say that I I want to be seen
as someone who is striving spiritually
and striving entrepreneurially at the
same time because I I don't think that
Yeah, I I think both spirituality and
success are not mutually exclusive and
if even if they are and that's what I
discover at the end of my life, I'm open
to that. But I'm excited by the
experiment and hypothesis of if it is
possible. That that experiment
fascinates me and pulls me closer to it.
And I I'll tell you why I believe it's a
worthy pursuit.
>> Mhm.
>> Is because the other choice is to say,
okay, I I think people can just be
successful and not be spiritual. I don't
know if you want to live in that world,
David. I don't want to live in that
world. But I don't want to live in a
world full of successful people who
don't have deeply held uh values and
have integrity and have and try and
create a difference in the world and be
of service and make an impact and do
things that are valuable. I don't want
to live in a world where people who are
successful don't have those values. And
I'm glad I get to pass that on and be
the latest uh mailman for uh and and
that's how I really see it. And so I I
think it's a bit of a weak argument
because the the alternatives are not
ones that me or you would subscribe to
either. I I realize I I didn't ask this
earlier. I think it's an important uh uh
part of your story, but why did you stop
uh training as a monk?
>> Yeah, it's uh it was one of the hardest
points in my life. Um because it sounds
crazy to say this, but
it was my dream while I was at college
like and it's and and that wasn't
because I lived a perfect life at
college at university, but it was like
I'd made it kind of like this thing of
like I really hope I can do this after I
graduate. And I was actually at one
point thinking of quitting university
and doing it then. And the the monk
teacher said to me, no, you should you
should finish your education and and do
it after that, which I'm very grateful
they did that. Um, [snorts]
but it was one of the toughest things. I
dreamed about it. I'd wanted it. I'd,
you know, really believed that that was
going to be my path. I really believed I
was going to do it for the rest of my
life. Whether that was me being naive or
whether it was my um youth enthusiasm,
uh, you know, at 22 years of age, I I
really believe that. And so leaving
wasn't easy. It was it was very
difficult because I felt like I was
failing. And that at that point in time
was one of the heaviest things I was
going through even though it because it
felt like a divorce.
>> But was there a precipitating incident
like why did you make the decision to
>> Yeah. No, no, no. So the so the why was
it was extremely rough on my health.
>> Um my health was taken a massive hit. Um
I'd spent time in hospital. Yeah. I'd
spent time in hospital during my time in
the monastery. Um both in India and the
UK. And I I was really like I was I was
struggling. I had had polyp in my throat
that had to be lasered out. Um, a year
before I left, I had uh exhaustion,
which was some doctors said it was
chronic fatigue. It was I was really
like I was emaciated. I I weighed around
I want to get the metrics right, but I
weighed around like 60 kg if that's
right. Like I was like really really
emaciated and I'd lost lost a lot of
weight.
>> Physically you were struggling. physic.
Yeah, physically I was struggling and
and
>> so there was a massive health component
that really really hit me hard. And I
think what's really interesting is when
your physical health goes, it affects
your mental health and your emotional
health even more. So partly what I'm
expressing is feeling like a divorce and
a failure. I think it's also because my
my physical health was falling apart.
The other side of it, funnily enough, at
the same time, was I genuinely deeply
believed that all of that self-awareness
made me realize I wasn't a monk. and
maybe I don't have what it takes and
that realization I mean I left now 30
it's been 13 years since I left so I'm a
bit distant from that emotion now but um
it's still it still hit me so that's
like a collection of I'm I'm letting you
in on all of it because it's it's not as
easy to be like there was this it was
like there was health there was my
self-awareness through all the
meditation there was emotional weakness
mental weakness uh understanding of who
I was there was it was it was a
complicated time
>> I just have I don't mean to belabor I
have one more question about [laughter]
sort of one just one more just one more
about kind of like a a tension. So, you
know, I understand that one of your uh
larger goals is to like uh I guess you
could say like bring people into the
tent where they might encounter ideas
that can help improve their lives. But
sometimes like is the is the way that
you have to do that
um can that feel a little bit funky for
you? For for example, the way you have
to title your videos online, right? Just
these are sort of algorithmic
necessities and necessities for
capturing people's attention, but they
have titles like, you know, um, attract
anything you want, break free from your
drama, wake up completely different.
Now, of course, you and I both know no
one video [laughter]
can deliver on that promise. Um, but I
feel like your position is no, but you
know, that's how you get them in and
then we present them with information
that can be helpful. But is is there do
do you ever feel like it's a little
Yeah, I guess funky is is the word that
comes to mind for me. Like do you ever
feel a little funky about the fact that
like to get people in maybe you you have
to kind of make these hyperbolic
promises?
>> It's a great question. I I I think that
there's a I love writing something like
that and then almost debating the
concept in my video. Like for example, I
debate this idea of manifestation. So I
have many videos that have manifestation
in the title, but it as soon as it gets
in there, I'm like guys, there is no
such thing as manifesting what you want
simply by dreaming about it or writing,
you know, whatever it may be. I'm
actually breaking it down. And so
sometimes I think it's a way of
debunking myths. Sometimes it's a way of
actually uh introducing people to new
ideas. And and I do agree with you that
we live in a uh attention economy. We
live in a space where we have to have
the ability to uh help someone get
through the door. That that is really
that is just the way the world works.
It's just the way things are today. And
to me, if the promise and what's on the
inside is valuable, that's actually also
what will make people stay. So if it was
simply just a title, the views and the
transformation wouldn't be valid or
value. It wouldn't happen. Jay, I know
I've know I've been uh sort of
implicitly critical or skeptical of the
idea about the idea of like uh uh quick
hit uh uh fixes or or easy answers, but
can what's one thing we can leave people
with? [laughter]
Hopefully then you know your answer. We
can clip it and put it on our socials
and it'll go viral. What's [laughter]
one
we have to pick put the right title on
it too, but what's what's one piece of
advice you want to give uh people here
at the end of of our conversation that
you think could really help them when
they go back to their lives.
Sorry, I'm taking my time because you've
asked me such a big question and I don't
want to be uh I don't want to be um you
know
I think as humans we have this tendency
to say god the last 5 years in that job
were a waste of time now I found my path
or you know what that relationship just
wasted three years of my life and I I
don't know if I'll ever find love again
and we have this habit of almost
disregarding our experience our lessons
our emotion, our everything we've been
through and now saying we found it. And
I would encourage people to reflect on
those moments, to learn from them, to
value them no matter how difficult and
painful they might be. And uh and
there'll be so much value in it. I don't
think that clip's going to go viral or
give you what you want, but uh but it's
it's it's it's something that's been on
my heart and mind a lot.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, all I ever want is
an honest answer. So, thank you very
much and uh and good luck with
everything in the future.
>> David, you too. Thank you so much for
your time and energy and uh I hope our
pops cross again.
[music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro
>> and I'm David Maresy
>> and we're the hosts of the interview an
audio [music] and video podcast from the
New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe [music] to our YouTube channel
so you'll never miss an episode.